Refactor initial conditions (#572)
HopkinsIDD/flepiMoP: documentation/gitbook/gempyor/model-implementation/initial-conditions-vs-seeding.md

---
description: |
    Both initial conditions and seeding can be used for similar purposes, but have
    a few differences that may affect which feature best suites your use case.
---

# Initial Conditions vs Seeding

> Both initial conditions and seeding can be used to create similar behaviors. While the previous pages cover in detail each component's functionality, below is a brief table highlighting the major differences to help you decide what to use for your situation.

Reviewer: This needs a bit of a tune-up. More like:

```suggestion
Infectious disease models require some infections to kick off transmission dynamics. These can be present in the starting state for the simulation (as `initial_conditions`) or introduced over time (via `seeding`). Other sections (links?) provide a detailed breakdown, but this table highlights the major differences between these approaches to help you decide what to use for your situation.
```

also, are initial conditions and seeding mutually exclusive?

also-also-aside, do we need to think about the parametrization-based approach for seeding as well?

Reviewer: (i see from text below, yes, seeding still needs to enable parametrization)

Author: > also-also-aside, do we need to think about the parametrization-based approach for seeding as well?

I think at some point we might be interested in unifying the two concepts into one? Might be outside the scope of this PR though.

Author: > also, are initial conditions and seeding mutually exclusive?

No, these can be used in conjunction. They are both provided to `gempyor.steps_rk4.rk4_integration` and that function uses both.

|                         | Initial Conditions                                                                      | Seeding                                                                            |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Main purpose            | Specifying compartments sizes at the initial time.                                      | Instantaneously changing compartment sizes at arbitrary times.                     |

Reviewer: to double check, but does seeding really instantly add to the infectious (or whatever) compartment? or is it generally taking an S and making an I? I think most often it should be modeling a force of exposure, which would mean that (for example) a more R population would experience fewer seeding introductions.

```suggestion
| Main purpose            | Specifying compartments sizes at the initial time.                                      | Instantaneously transferring between compartments at arbitrary times.                     |
```

Author: You're correct, I did not realize the difference between the two was important and got loose with the language. This is the code that takes care of the instantaneous transition:

https://github.com/HopkinsIDD/flepiMoP/blob/ad62f2d00082de5b60e62100be7b24fddc6931da/flepimop/gempyor_pkg/src/gempyor/steps_rk4.py#L230-L249

| Default functionality   | Each subpopulations entire population is placed in the first compartment.               | No seeding events occur.                                                           |
| Config section needed   | Optional, results in warning that default functionality used.                           | Optional.                                                                          |

> | Required input files    | Depending on method could be a parquet or CSV file(s).                                  | Yes, a CSV describing seeding events with a format dependent on method used.       |

Reviewer: Bit confusing - shouldn't we also be mentioning plugins here? Roughly, we support 1) a precalculated file (csv or parquet) that can be read into the necessary format OR 2) a script to calculate that necessary format, using model structure + parameters.

aside: i could also imagine supporting a simple funcational interface, as with other parameters.

Author: Does this cover that:

https://github.com/HopkinsIDD/flepiMoP/blob/ac61e062582c7d44714df8b264d8c0ffc1d6521a/documentation/gitbook/gempyor/model-implementation/initial-conditions-vs-seeding.md?plain=1#L18
